---
title: Accessible websites at 400% browser zoom
date: "December 12, 2024"
categories: 
  - "accessibility"
  - "CSS"

---

### Reflow
I recently became aware of two WCAG Guidelines that sound similar, but are fundamentally different (and, to different degrees, challenging to achieve).

The first of these is the ["Reflow"](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#reflow) requirement, namely that "content can be enlarged without increasing line length." 

You might be wondering, as I did, what does that even mean? 

Perhaps the following criteria might help (or not):
* Vertical scrolling content at a width equivalent to 320 CSS pixels
* Horizontal scrolling content at a height equivalent to 256 CSS pixels.

Okay, well, what does that mean? Again, ever helpful, WCAG allows

<blockquote>320 CSS pixels is equivalent to a starting viewport width of 1280 CSS pixels wide at 400% zoom. For web content which is designed to scroll horizontally (e.g., with vertical text), 256 CSS pixels is equivalent to a starting viewport height of 1024 CSS pixels at 400% zoom</blockquote>

Long and short seems to be that if you zoom your browser to 400%, text should "reflow", that is, not require scrolling in more than one dimension, and not break in ways that reduce (or remove) legibility. 

The ["Understanding"](https://www.w3.org/WAI/WCAG21/Understanding/reflow.html) page for this criterion is helpful. E.g. "Spatial relationships of content may change when users zoom, but all information and functionality should continue to be available."


### How to comply
It turns out that in many cases, if the website is built to be responsive at 100% zoom, it will also be responsive at 400% zoom. Increasing zoom kind of behaves as if your screen gets progressively smaller, and responsive breakpoints, being breakpoints, kick in and "automatically" reflow the content. Avoid fixed-width elements, and overly complex, overlapping arrangements and you're probably fine.

But that alone won't help with 2x font-size increases. Read more about that in a future post. 