---
title: Accessibility with 2x font zoom
date: "December 20, 2024"
categories: 
  - "accessibility"
  - "css"
  - "font scale"
---


## Ensure that text can be doubled in size
Unlike some WCAG g0uidelines, [success criterion 1.4.4](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#resize-text) is quite straightforward:

> Except for captions and images of text, text can be resized without assistive technology up to 200 percent without loss of content or functionality.

Unlike [Reflow](/blog/2) that I was writing about a few days ago, however, this one can be tricky to achieve.

Especially if you, like me, have not consistently used relative units (e.g. `em` and `rem`) for fonts and other sizes in your CSS/SCSS. 

## How to fix it
Here are the primary pieces you should put in place:
1. Use a root font size of `16px`. Add this to `body`, `html` or the pseudo-selector `:root`, like so: 

```css
  :root {
    font-size: 16px; 
  }
```

2. Everywhere else (probably, with the exception of borders, box-shadows, and importantly break points, see below), define units with `rem`, like so: 
```css
  .awesome-div {
    font-size: 1rem; 
    margin-bottom: 0.375rem;
    margin-top: 1rem; 
    padding-left: 0.375rem;
    padding-right: 0.375rem;
    min-height: 12rem; 
  }
```


3. Testing how this responds to 2x font zoom is easy. Just open the console, and change root to: 
```css
  :root {
    font-size: 32px; 
  }
```

I recommend going ahead and using `rem` for everthing, to base sizes relative to the root of `16px`. You could also mix in `em` if you have a need to do so, as long as some parent is defined in `rem`. 

Everything should be good to go, except that it might be ugly. Especially if you haven't defined breakpoints in `em` or `rem`. 

Bootstrap 4 introduced `rem` and `em` units for almost everything in the release of BS 4. Interestingly, though, they did not extend this to the grid, and that was[] on purpose](https://getbootstrap.com/docs/4.6/layout/grid/#grid-options):

> While Bootstrap uses ems or rems for defining most sizes, pxs are used for grid breakpoints and container widths. This is because the viewport width is in pixels and does not change with the font size.

This may also be related to a Safari bug, where Safari doesn't handle `rem` based media queries correctly. 

## How to comply
With the above in place, your website should be compliant to WCAG 1.4.4, despite the fact that grid columns written using `px` will get very narrow, and the page will arguably be quite ugly. As long as text is readable, and complies with requirements spelled out in the ["Reflow"](https://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG21/#reflow) requirement, they you should be good to go.